Brain Flatmap Visualization Tools Instructions
File setup (steps 1-5, for tools first use).
1.	The brain flatmap visualization tools require a Google Account and a modern web browser (Google Chrome recommended). If you do not already have a Google Account, visit the following link to create one: https://accounts.google.com/signup/v2/webcreateaccount?flowName=GlifWebSignIn&flowEntry=SignUp.
2.	Files required to run the flatmap tools are stored as a repository on GitHub (a popular website for open-source software development). A free GitHub account is required to access the files (https://github.com). Sign into your GitHub account and visit: https://github.com/duckworthchloe/brainflatmapvisualizationtool. Select the green [Code] button and then select [Download ZIP].
3.	Locate and open the ZIP file you downloaded (file name: brainflatmapvisualizationtool-main). This will open the ZIP file contents to show an unzipped folder with the same name as the ZIP file. Drag and drop or copy and paste the unzipped folder to an accessible folder on your computer.
4.	Open your web browser and sign into your Google Account, then in Google Drive open the [My Drive] folder (left side menu) or follow this link: https://drive.google.com/drive/my-drive.
5.	In the top left corner, select the [+ New] button, then select [Folder upload], then locate and select the unzipped [brainflatmapvisualizationtool-main] folder on your computer and select [Upload] to upload the folder to your Google Drive.

•	Steps 1-5 only need to be performed once for the same Google Account.
Data entry (steps 6-8).
6.	After the folder [brainflatmapvisualizationtool-main] has finished uploading to your Google Drive, open the folder and then open one of the [Rat], [Mouse], or [Human] subfolders according to your preference / data. A document file (named README) with these instructions is included in the folder.

•	The following steps use the Rat flatmap as an example; the same steps apply to Mouse and Human.
7.	In the [Rat] folder open the file ratinputtedData.xlsx (equivalent files for Mouse and Human are named accordingly). Opening the .xlsx spreadsheet file will create and open a Google Sheet version of it. This step only needs to be performed once for each data entry session.
8.	Data entry is performed on the first sheet of the ratinputtedData spreadsheet. Enter your data according to region abbreviation and data values. These may be entered individually or copied and pasted from your own spreadsheet or elsewhere. If copy/pasting, to avoid altering the sheet formatting, perform the paste operation as Values only, using the following Google Drive menu/selection sequence: [Edit] > [Paste Special] > [Values only] (the keyboard shortcut for this operation is combined [Ctrl]+[Shift]+[V]).
Data entry columns are provided for both sides of the brain [Left side or side 1] and [Right side or side 2]. If your data applies to one side only, then enter it on that side only.

•	In addition to allowing for entry of bilateral data, the data entry columns for the two sides may also be used to represent different sets of data for comparative purposes (for example, including two sets of data from the same brain side).

•	Data entered for side 1 (or left side) will appear on the bottom half of the flatmap diagram; side 2 (or right side) data will appear on the top half.
Region names and abbreviations are listed for reference on the second sheet [Region names] in alphabetical and topographic arrangements. Abbreviations must be entered exactly as shown on the [Region names] sheet to enable correct data processing. As the data are entered, the processed data will appear on gray shaded columns to the right of the [Data Entry] column, and basic Summary statistics for the data will appear above them.

•	An exception to numerical data entry is enabled to indicate an experimental site (for example the site of an injection or other manipulation). For this purpose, enter the text “SITE” in the Data Value column for the experimental site region or regions. These entries will be rendered in a different color from the other data on the flatmap.
By default, data entered are assigned to seven equally spaced bins, calculated according to the maximum and minimum data values. To define a different bin range, use the top left table on the [Data entry] sheet. As indicated on the bin range table annotation, user defined bins 2-7 are entered in the column titled [(<=) high] in an ascending sequence sufficient to include the highest value in your dataset.

•	If your data includes both positive and negative values, the sign of the negative values must first be reversed (numbers converted to positive integers), and these should then be entered either on a separate sheet or using the “two side” option described above. Additionally, for comparative purposes, different side data can be binned separately, either automatically when the default (equally spaced) bin range is used, or user-defined (refer to the two annotations below).

•	If data are entered for both sides of the brain (or both data columns are used), by default the same bin range (user-defined, or default equally spaced) will apply to all the data. However, for comparative purposes (e.g., data from different experiments), the data for each side can be automatically binned separately when the default bin range is used. To enable this option, select “yes” from the dropdown menu in the column to the right of the bin range table at top left.

•	To apply a different user-defined bin range to each side data column, first enter data for one side, using the first user-defined bin range, then copy and paste the Region Abbreviation and Data Value (binned) columns from the Auto-processed data columns (gray shaded) to a different spreadsheet. Next, clear the entered data and repeat these steps with the second set of data and second user-defined bin range. Then again clear the data entry columns, clear the user-defined bin range, and paste the two copied sets of data each to a different side of the Data Entry columns. Before proceeding to generate the flatmap, ensure that the option to bin side data separately is set to “no”.
Flatmap generation (steps 9-11).
9.	When you have finished entering data, in the folder [brainflatmapvisualizationtool-main] in your Google Drive, open the file ratFlatmap.ipynb (a notebook document file containing the code required to generate the flatmap). Opening ratFlatmap.ipynb will open the code document in a new browser tab in Google Colaboratory. When opening ratFlatmap.ipynb, if you are prompted with an [Open with Colab] button at the top of the page, select it. If this opens the ratFlatmap.ipynb file, proceed to step 10, otherwise select [Connect more apps], and in the window that appears select the [Search] button, and search for “Colaboratory”. Then select [Colaboratory] and [Install] buttons. When prompted for permission, select [Continue] and select/sign into the Google Account that you are using. After installation, refresh the browser window, and the code will open in Colaboratory.
10.	You will now execute code in Colaboratory to generate the brain flatmap data diagram. To execute the code it is necessary to “play” code cells 1-3 in sequence. To perform this operation, from the [Runtime] menu at the top of the screen select [Run all] or use the keyboard shortcut [Ctrl+F9].
When the code is executing, a play icon [►] to the left of each code cell will be animated. Completion of code execution is indicated by a green check mark [✓] to the left of the play icon. Depending on your web browser and Google Account security settings, running the code may trigger one or security dialogue boxes asking for your permission to execute the code and to access your Google Drive files. For the code to run it is necessary for the Colaboratory notebook to have read and write access the associated Google Drive folder. Follow the prompts in the affirmative to proceed. Granting access may also generate automatic security notifications that are sent to your associated Google email (Gmail). 
11.	After all three steps of the code have executed, the flatmap files generated will be deposited in the [brainflatmapvisualizationtool-main] folder in your Google Drive. There may be a delay of a few minutes until the final diagrams are available, depending on the Google server speed. If the diagrams do not appear finalized, wait a few minutes, then refresh your browser window. Three files will be generated: ratFlatmapWithKey.pdf, ratFlatmap.pdf, and ratFlatmap.svg. These files can be previewed in the web browser and downloaded to your computer. The ratFlatmapWithKey.pdf file combines the flatmap with overlay and color key. The other two files do not include the overlay. In addition to these files, separate overlay only Adobe Illustrator and PDF files are also present in the [Rat] folder. All the files can be opened and edited for further customization in Adobe Illustrator, or other PDF and SVG file editing software (such as the Open-Source GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP), or Blender).

•	If you are entering multiple datasets, to prevent use of cached data, after clearing the data it is recommended to close and reopen the data entry sheet and .ipynb file before entering new data.
